---
title: 'Human Development'
date: '2016-11-16'
description:
tags: ['success', 'zen', 'universe', 'human']
---

# Human Development

### What is a Human?

We define a human by that which a human essentially is. Humans (like everything
else in existence) are interactions of the universe happening *here* and *now*.

For example, a wave is an interaction of the ocean AND it IS the ocean, the
ocean is an interaction of planet earth and also the earth, the earth is an
interaction of the solar system and also the solar system, and so on, until we
reach the Universe.

In the same fashion, a nail is an interaction of your body and it is also your
body, your nail is you, because you are defined by *all* of you (nails included).

We can say that humans (just like everything else in this planet) are an
interaction of the planet AND we are also the planet, the solar system, the
milky way galaxy, the constellation and the universe.

In conclusion, we say that a Human is, essentially, an interaction of the
Universe and is also the Universe expressing itself in the form of a Human
*here* and *now*.


### What is Human Development?

By human development I mean, a process in which steps are taken by a Human in
order to act and think 'more Human'.

#### What do *you* mean by 'more Human'?

To be more Human means to express ourselves as *what we continuously are* here
and now per the flow of the Universe. I believe there is a *flow* (think of it
as a compass leading the way) expressed by the Universe that leads to ourselves
living optimally as who we fundamentally are.

Now, I believe part of this *flow* is the same for everyone (i.e. we all are
meant to breathe), but another part of it is unique (i.e. some of us prefer to
become runners, other engineers, warriors, doctors, soldiers, priests, etcetera).

I will call this flow the *universal flow*. If one deviates from his or her
universal flow then one will cause others (humans, trees, mountains, stars, etc)
to also deviate in some way from their universal flow.

### How do I become 'more Human'?

To ask this question is to ask: What is my universal flow? I don't think there
is a way to express that using words, let me explain why.

#### Why we can't express any concept of 'Universal' meaning

I will pick a question I care about: What is the essential substance of all
things? (but you could just as well pick any other question that tries to
explain any aspect of the universe)

I could answer: The essential substance of all things are atoms.

I could ask: Well, atoms are *things* what is the essential substance of atoms?

I could answer: Well, atoms are made up of electrons, neutrons and protons.

I could ask again: Well electrons, neutrons and protons are things, what is the
essential substance of those?

I could answer: Well, those are made up of quarks. Aha!

I could ask again: Well, quarks are also things, what is the essential substance
of quarks?

I have no answer for this, but assuming the answer was X, I could repeat the
question again, for whatever X is infinitely, this is a known paradox
established by Socrates.

There is hope, however, because we can tell if the answer to those continuous
questions comes closer (whether it is proven by science or not) to the universal
flow, any and all progress of science is due to a Human perceiving the universal
flow and *then* proceeding to prove it via the scientific method, not the other
way around.

The scientific method is not a discovery tool, it is a proving tool, it alone
discovers nothing, as it proves only base on what we already know, but when
trying to discover something new, it is useless, specially if the discovery is
several leaps ahead of the current body of knowledge.

Curiously, to limit ourselves to discover only via the scientific method, is to
limit our advancement of knowledge and science. For example, the scientific
method is ineffective in helping us understand how the brain works, precisely
because we know very little of our brain with scientific rigor, relative to the
entirety of its complexity.

If we were to only use what "has been proven by science" to try to address our
problems sourced in the mind, then each time a person would have behavioral
problems, we would do *nothing* about it, because no solution has been *proven*
via the rigor of the scientific method (now, that would be crazy!).

This point I just mentioned was brought up by Robert M. Pirsig in his book "Zen
and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An inquiry into values".

#### Back to the original question, "How do I become more Human?"

It is my believe that the answer to 'what is my Universal flow' cannot be
described in words because the answer does not obey our current body of
knowledge, language and system of thought. It transcends them, it is of a higher
order that our limited expression capabilities cannot convey directly.

So this is where it gets tricky. I believe, we are *in touch* with the universal
flow and we *know* when a given action or thought is in harmony with it and when
it is not, but we have to trust our non-scientific personal knowledge of the
Universe. We are an expression of the Universe in the form of a Human *here* and
*now*, so we ought to now!

#### So how do I listen to my personal knowledge of the Universe?

It may be different for everyone, but in my case, I had a feeling that there was
something missing in how I perceived all of my experiences. As a quick example,
every time I saw the ocean, I perceived nothing other than colors and shapes
waving up and down without any meaning, interacting with the moon as a habitat
for meaningless living beings. I could not perceive its grandness, how me, the
ocean, the moon and sea life are connected, how we are all essentially the same
entity, the Universe.

It was this feeling of disconnection and emptiness, that made me want to know
more about what consciousness means. So I read philosophy, mainly influenced
by 3 philosophers: Socrates, Alan Watts and Robert M. Pirsig; and the two latter
were themselves influenced by Buddhism, Taoism, Hinduism and Zen.

What I finally learned is that we can *feel* if an action or thought is in
harmony with the flow of the universe, and many times this means ignoring what
our logical thoughts would tell us to do. The important thing is to remember
that logic SERVES our perception of the Universe, not the other way around.
Sometimes dialectical logic gets in the way of identifying the flow the
universe, sometimes they are the same.

Don't use our system of symbols, calculation and logic, and then proceed to say
that those are the Universe itself. They are mere models of the real thing: The
Universe. To think we can faithfully represent the Universe with symbols is a
grave mistake.

I don't know of any specific set of instructions or methods to *feel* if
something is in harmony with the Universe or not, it is something we already
know, but we have to stop ourselves from deviating from it. We get in the way of
ourselves.

As an example, what are the instructions or the methods you use to determine if
you like a certain song or if a joke is funny or not? None, you just know. In
the same way that we don't need and can't be taught how to love a person or
how to laugh at a joke, we don't need and can't be taught how to act and think
harmoniously, we already know.
